Add documentation for `Bimonad` (#4076)
typelevel/cats: docs/src/main/mdoc/typeclasses/bimonad.md

---
layout: docs
title:  "Bimonad"
section: "typeclasses"
source: "core/src/main/scala/cats/Bimonad.scala"
scaladoc: "#cats.Bimonad"
---
# Bimonad

> The `Bimonad` trait directly extends `Monad` and `Comonad` without introducing new behaviour. `Bimonad` is 

Reviewer: I wonder if this is confusing—even though it doesn't introduce new methods, as you note below it does have additional laws which do affect (restrict, actually) it's behavior relative to it's parent traits. Maybe prefer the word method here?

Author: Yep i agree. I'll use `without introducing new methods`

> different of other `Bi` typeclasses like `Bifunctor`, `Bifoldable` or `Bitraverse` where the prefix describes a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different from other `Bi` typeclasses like `Bifunctor`, `Bifoldable` or `Bitraverse` where the prefix describes a
```

> `F[_, _]`. The `Bimonad` is a `F[_]` and could be better seen as a dual monad i.e. something that is both a `Monad` and 

Reviewer: "dual monad" is another one that I worry is confusing. For one, `Comonad` is not a `Monad`. Actually it is the dual of `Monad`!
https://typelevel.org/cats/typeclasses/comonad.html

Author: The `DualMonad`\\`SelfDualMonad` thing i picked from old issues like #1297

I'll change it to:
```
The `Bimonad` is a `F[_]` thus the `Bi` prefix has a different meaning here: it's both a `Monad` and a `Comonad`.
```

a `Comonad`.

If you use `Bimonad` as a convenience type such that `def f[T[_] : Monad, Comonad, S](fa: T[S]): S` is re-written to
`def f[T[_] : Bimonad, S](fa: T[S]): S` keep in mind `Bimonad` has its own added laws so something that is both monadic 
and comonadic may not necessarily be a lawful `Bimonad`.

###Eval as a Bimonad

> Eval is a lawful `Bimonad` so you can chain computations and `extract` the result at the end.

Reviewer: Just a suggestion, to show the relationship to both parents.
```suggestion
Eval is a lawful `Bimonad` so you can chain computations (like a `Monad`) and `extract` the result at the end (like a `Comonad`).
```

Note the equivalence:
```scala mdoc
import cats._
import cats.data._
import cats.implicits._

> Bimonad[Eval].pure(true).extract === Eval.now(true).value

Reviewer: I think what you are trying to show here is that `pure` is implemented as `now` and `extract` as `value`? One alternative would be to define `Bimonad[Eval]` here just for demonstrative purposes, WDYT?

Author: > I think what you are trying to show here is that `pure` is implemented as `now` and `extract` as `value`?
Yes

> One alternative would be to define Bimonad[Eval] here just for demonstrative purposes, WDYT?

Something like that ?
```scala
val evalBimonad = Bimonad[Eval]

evalBimonad.pure(true).extract === Eval.now(true).value
```

Reviewer: I was thinking like how they define `optionMonad` in the `Monad` docs:
http://typelevel.org/cats/typeclasses/monad.html

```

Using generic bimonad syntax we could define a function that appends and extracts a configuration:
```scala mdoc
def make[T[_]: Bimonad](config: T[String]): String = 
  config
    .flatMap(c => Bimonad[T].pure(c + " with option A"))
    .flatMap(c => Bimonad[T].pure(c + " with option B"))
    .flatMap(c => Bimonad[T].pure(c + " with option C"))
    .extract
```

This will work with all types of `Eval`:
```scala mdoc
make(Eval.now("config"))
make(Eval.later("config"))

> //String = config with option A with option B with option C

Reviewer: I'm not an `mdoc` expert but I'm pretty sure it will automatically render the result when it runs :) I think you can preview this by running `docs/mdoc --watch` in sbt but not 100% sure.
```suggestion
```

Author: Yep it was helpful. Thanks!

```

> Given that `Function0` or `NonEmptyList` are also lawful bimonads the following calls are also valid:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Function0` and `NonEmptyList` are also lawful bimonads so the following calls are also valid:
```

```scala mdoc
make(() => "config")
make(NonEmptyList.one("config"))

> //String = config with option A with option B with option C

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
layout: docs
title:  "Bimonad"
section: "typeclasses"
source: "core/src/main/scala/cats/Bimonad.scala"
scaladoc: "#cats.Bimonad"
---
# Bimonad

The `Bimonad` trait directly extends `Monad` and `Comonad` without introducing new methods. `Bimonad` is
different from other `Bi` typeclasses like `Bifunctor`, `Bifoldable` or `Bitraverse` where the prefix describes a
`F[_, _]`. The `Bimonad` is a `F[_]` and the `Bi` prefix has a different meaning here: it's both a `Monad` and a `Comonad`.

> 

Reviewer: ... like this:
```suggestion
Keep in mind `Bimonad` has its own added laws so something that is both monadic
and comonadic may not necessarily be a lawful `Bimonad`.

```

and comonadic may not necessarily be a lawful `Bimonad`.

If you use `Bimonad` as a convenience type such that:
```scala

> def f[T[_] : Monad, Comonad, S](fa: T[S]): S

Reviewer 2: I think this should be `def f[T[_]: Monad: Comonad, S](fa: T[S]): S`

I think the comma here is making`Comonad` just a type parameter.

Author: Yep my bad ..`:Monad :Comonad` is what I wanted

```
is re-written to:
```scala

> def f[T[_] : Bimonad, S](fa: T[S]): S

Reviewer 2: nit: we generally don't put a space after the type, so we would change to: `f[T[_]: Bimonad, S]`

keep in mind `Bimonad` has its own added laws so something that is both monadic

> and comonadic may not necessarily be a lawful `Bimonad`.

Reviewer: I think this is important enough to include at the beginning ...

### NonEmptyList as a Bimonad
`NonEmptyList[_]` is a lawful `Bimonad` so you can chain computations (like a `Monad`) and `extract` the result at the end (like a `Comonad`).

> Here is a possible implementation based on existing monad and comonad:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a possible implementation:
```

```scala mdoc
import cats._
import cats.data._
import cats.implicits._

> implicit def nelBimonad =

Reviewer 2: I would make this a `implicit val` since it doesn't have any args.

>   new Bimonad[Eval] {

Reviewer 2: `Eval[_]` is a bit of a bad choice here because the Comonad is not very safe. Calling `.value` on an Eval must be done with some care (it needs to be at O(1) stack depth or you lose the stack safety.  If you are calling this as part of a recursive call it often blows up).

`Id[_]` is also a Comonad, but a bit of a boring one. I wonder if `NonEmptyList[_]` would be a better example since it is non-trivial but also not somewhat unsafe in this way.

Author: Hm ok, I was hesitating between `Eval[_]` and `NonEmptyList[_]` for the main example.
I'll just use `NonEmptyList[_]`.

>     //use NonEmptyList specific methods for creation and extraction

Reviewer: Maybe a good place to point out the `Bimonad` law about the relationship between `pure` and `extract`? :)

Author: ```scala
    //nelBimonad needs to respect: `nelBimonad.extract(nelBimonad.pure(a)) <-> a`
``` 
Something like this ?

>     //in order to have a lawful bimonad `pure` and `extract` need to respect: `nelBimonad.extract(nelBimonad.pure(a)) <-> a`

Reviewer: Just a personal style nitpick but I prefer a space here between `//` and the comment 😅 

```suggestion
    // in order to have a lawful bimonad `pure` and `extract` need to respect: `nelBimonad.extract(nelBimonad.pure(a)) <-> a`
```

keep in mind `Bimonad` has its own added laws so something that is both monadic
and comonadic may not necessarily be a lawful `Bimonad`.

### NonEmptyList as a Bimonad
NonEmptyList is a lawful `Bimonad` so you can chain computations (like a `Monad`) and `extract` the result at the end (like a `Comonad`).

Here is a possible implementation based on existing monad and comonad:
```scala mdoc
import cats._
import cats.data._
import cats.implicits._

implicit def nelBimonad(implicit monad: Monad[NonEmptyList], comonad: Comonad[NonEmptyList]) =
  new Bimonad[NonEmptyList] {

    //use NonEmptyList specific methods for creation and extraction
    override def pure[A](a: A): NonEmptyList[A] =
      NonEmptyList.one(a)

    override def extract[A](fa: NonEmptyList[A]): A =
      fa.head

    //use the coflatMap from the NonEmptyList comonad
    override def coflatMap[A, B](fa: NonEmptyList[A])(f: NonEmptyList[A] => B): NonEmptyList[B] =

>       comonad.coflatMap(fa)(f)

Reviewer: Actually we can directly call `flatMap` and `coflatMap` directly on the `NonEmptyList` :)

Author: I was hopping this shows `flatMap` and `coflatMap` as originating from `monad` and `comonad`. 
Don't you think it's a good idea to delegate to the `monad` and `comonad` variables ?

Reviewer: Yes, I do see that now. But then isn't it confusing, because `pure` and `extract` are also defined in `monad` and `comonad`, so we should delegate those as well?

Reviewer: > I thought using one and head in the implementation will make this more obvious

I agree, I think this is the right way to do it. So, we can just delegate `flatMap` and `coflatMap` to the list without `monad`/`comonad` and maybe leave `tailRecM` as an exercise for the reader 😉

Anyway just my opinion, not really sure what the best thing to do here is. But I think separating the implementations of `pure` and `extract` makes it seem like they are inconsistent or different from the definitions in `monad` or `comonad`.

Author: So the current `tailRecM` implementation for `NonEmptyList[_]` doesn't look trivial .. I mean I fear Its understanding detours too much and I agree it's a good idea to leave it as an exercise 👍 

> Anyway just my opinion, not really sure what the best thing to do here is. But I think separating the implementations of pure and extract makes it seem like they are inconsistent or different from the definitions in monad or comonad.

Yes, I will remove `monad` and `comonad`.
